Am tq docs (#11744)
AudiusProject/audius-protocol: packages/common/src/api/tan-query/README.md

// table of contents

## Table of Contents

1. [Purpose](#purpose)
2. [Philosophy](#philosophy)
3. [Query Hook Usage](#query-hook-usage)
   - [Basic Examples](#basic-examples)
     - [Fetching a User](#fetching-a-user)
     - [Selecting data](#selecting-data)
     - [Pagination](#pagination)
4. [Mutations](#mutations-writes)
5. [Writing Your Own Hooks](#writing-your-own-hooks)
   - [Query Hooks (Fetching Data)](#query-hooks-fetching-data)
   - [Mutation Hooks (Changing Data)](#mutation-hooks-changing-data)
   - [Batching](#batching)
   - [Priming Data](#priming-data)
6. [Normalization & Single Source of Truth](#normalization--single-source-of-truth)
7. [Default Cache Behavior](#default-cache-behavior)

# Purpose

This directory centralizes data fetching and mutation logic using [TanStack Query](https://tanstack.com/query/latest) (v5). It provides React hooks for interacting with the Audius API and managing server state within the client.

```typescript

> import {} from '@audius/common/api'

Reviewer: is this supposed to be an example of something?

```

# Philosophy

The core goals of using TanStack Query here are:

1.  **Declarative Data Fetching:** Define _what_ data is needed, and let TanStack Query handle _how_ and _when_ to fetch it.

> 1.  **Normalization:** Store fetched entities (users, tracks, collections) in a normalized way to ensure consistency and efficient updates.

Reviewer: I think a simpler way to sum this up is something like 
**Single source of truth for entities** - To ensure consistent updates & reduce the size of our cache, we always want to store entities in one SOT and reference them

> 1.  TOOD

Reviewer: I think calling out selectors as part of our philosophy is important enough to highlight
**Use selectors frequently** - To maximize efficiency and minimize rerendering, use selectors wherever possible (see below for details)

## Normalization & Single Source of Truth

TanStack Query doesn't enforce normalization itself, but we follow a pattern:

1.  **Fetch Entities by ID:** Hooks like `useUser`, `useTrack`, `useCollection` fetch individual entities and store them under a query key specific to that entity's ID (e.g., `['user', 123]`).

> 2.  **Fetch Lists of IDs:** Hooks fetching lists (e.g., `useFollowers`, `useFavoritedTracks`) often fetch and prime the full entities, but store _only the IDs_ in their cache keys or minimal data for the list itself.

Reviewer: nit: I feel like this could be a little bit more clear? Mainly I think calling out that we're not technically fetching a full list of IDs from an data fetching perspective
```suggestion
2.  **Fetch Lists of Entities:** When a hooks fetches a list of entities (e.g., `useFollowers`, `useFavoritedTracks`) the hook will fetch a list of full entities, then prime the individual entity cache, but then only stores & returns IDs for that hook.
```

3.  **Combine in UI:** The UI component fetches the list (e.g., follower IDs) and then uses individual entity hooks (`useUser`) for each ID to get the full data. Because we prime the cache on fetch succeeded, the requests for the individual entities always cache hit.

> 

Reviewer: I think a code example would really benefit this section. A psuedocode/semi-real example of something like `useTrack` vs `useTrending` vs usage in components (maybe can show off using `useUser` with the data returned from `useTrending)

>     _Note: In some cases, the `useUsers` call is combined into the tan-query hook for convenience._

Reviewer: Honestly I feel like this may not even be worth calling out as we hopefully move away from it

> This ensures _single source of truth_ for each datum. If a user's details are updated via `useUpdateUser`, all components displaying that user (via `useUser(userId)`) will reflect the change automatically. Priming the cache (`queryClient.setQueryData`) after mutations is crucial for this pattern.

Reviewer: not quite sure what you mean priming after mutations?

# Query Hook Usage

> If a hook exists for the data you need, simply call the hook in your component. The hook will handle the selecting and/or fetching of data as needed. In general, you can think of these hooks as source agnostic suppliers of data. For example, `useUser` will return the requested `User` object either from cache or via sdk call. You don't need to know which one.

Reviewer: nit: I think its probably confusing to mention selecting here
```suggestion
If a hook exists for the data you need, simply call the hook in your component. The hook will handle and/or fetching of data as needed. In general, you can think of these hooks as source agnostic suppliers of data. For example, `useUser` will return the requested `User` object either from cache or via sdk call. You don't need to know which one.
```

Hooks typically accept parameters required for the API call and an optional `options` object which can include standard TanStack Query options like `enabled`, `select`, `staleTime`, etc.

#### Hook Options

Most hooks accept an `options` object as their last parameter. Here are common options you might use:

- `enabled`: Boolean that controls whether the query should run. Useful for conditional fetching.
  - note that all of our hooks are written to self-disable if the primary arg is missing or empty (e.g. `useUser(null)`)
- `select`: Function to transform/select data from the raw query result.

#### Return type

- `data` - the data you requested
- `isPending` - true while data is on the way but not yet populated
- `isError`, `error` - true if there's an error; error object

> Note: See the tan-stack [useQuery docs](https://tanstack.com/query/latest/docs/framework/react/reference/useQuery) for the full return type

Reviewer: This section feels a little unnecessary. That being said I do feel it important to point out that we use `isPending` and `isFetching` (not `isLoading`) - maybe we can just highlight that and point to the docs for everything else?

  return <h1>{user.name}</h1>
}
```

### Selecting data

The `select` option is powerful for transforming data or extracting only what's needed. Used to select one or more properties from a complex object.

This _improves performance_ as components re-render only when the selected data changes, not when any part of the user object changes.

```typescript
import { useUser } from '@audius/common/api'

const UserNameDisplay = ({ userId }: { userId: ID }) => {
  // Only select the name field, ignoring other user data
  const { data: userName } = useUser(
    userId,
    {
      // Transform the full user object to just the name property
      select: (user) => user.name
    }
  )

  return <span>{userName || 'Unknown user'}</span>
}
```

### Pagination

Many hooks support progressive pagination through the `useInfiniteQuery` pattern.

- `data` is structured with `pages` array containing each page of results

  _Note: many of our paginated queries actually use `select` internally to return a flattened list of data instead of the pages array_

- `fetchNextPage()` loads the next page of data
- `hasNextPage` indicates if more data exists

> - `isFetchingNextPage` is `true` while loading the next page

Reviewer: Instead of `fetchNextPage()` we should call out `loadNextPage()`. Despite being a manual addition it's our standard method

Reviewer: side note; I want to think of a better in-code way to make this standard clear 😅 
maybe we take `fetchNextPage` off by default

Pagination hook implementation internally handles cursor management between pages.

_Note: for simple pagination, including the `pageNumber` in the `queryKey` array is sufficient to return the appropriate page of data. A standard useQuery can be used for this, but it will not allow for the `fetchNextPage` pattern_

```typescript
import { useTrending } from '@audius/common/api'

const TrendingTracksList = () => {
  const {
    data,

>     fetchNextPage,

Reviewer: loadNextPage

>     fetchNextPage,

Reviewer: we should point out this guy instead
```suggestion
    loadNextPage
```

        </button>
      )}
    </div>
  )
}
```

# Mutations (writes)

Mutations are used for creating, updating, or deleting data. Similar to calling a query hook, calling a mutation hook is simple. However, instead of returning data, they return a callback.

```typescript
const { mutate, /* OR */ mutateAsync } = useMyMutation(args)

const onClickButton = useCallback(() => {
  mutate()
}, [mutate])
```

# Writing Your Own Hooks

## Query Hooks (Fetching Data)

1.  **Define Query Key:**

    - Add a unique key string to the `QUERY_KEYS` object in `queryKeys.ts`.
    - Create an exported function (e.g., `getMyDataQueryKey`) that returns the query key array, usually including parameters. Query keys should be serializable arrays.
    - Use the `QueryKey<T>` type to properly type your query keys for TypeScript inference.

    ```typescript
    // queryKeys.ts
    import { QueryKey } from './types'
    import { MyData } from '~/models/MyData'

    export const QUERY_KEYS = {
      // ... existing keys
      myData: 'myData'
    } as const

    // useMyData.ts
    export const getMyDataQueryKey = (param: string) =>
      [QUERY_KEYS.myData, param] as unknown as QueryKey<MyData>
    ```

>     The `as unknown as QueryKey<MyData>` type cast is important for TanStack Query's type inference. The `QueryKey<T>` type uses TanStack's `DataTag` to tell the query client what type of data is stored at this key, enabling better TypeScript support when using `queryClient.getQueryData` and other methods.

Reviewer: this is a bit verbose, particularly the implementation detail about DataTag. I think just this is sufficient
```suggestion
    The `as unknown as QueryKey<MyData>` type cast is necessary for TanStack Query's type inference. This will make `queryClient.getQueryData` and other methods to have strong typing.
```

1.  **Create the Hook:**

    - Use the `useQuery` or `useInfiniteQuery` (paginated) hook from `@tanstack/react-query`.
    - Use `useAudiusQueryContext` to get access to the `audiusSdk`.
    - Implement the `queryFn` to call the relevant SDK method.
    - Use the query key function defined in step 1.

>     - Consider using batching if applicable (see below).

Reviewer: is it worth calling out batching? very rare I feel like that we want to add batching 🤔 its really only for our entities and we dont add new ones very often

- Look at the `batchers/` directory for examples (e.g., `getUsersBatcher`).
- Batchers collect requests over a short time window and make a single API call for multiple resources.
- Inside a query hook's `queryFn`, instead of calling the SDK directly, you obtain an instance of the relevant batcher and call its `fetch` method.

See `useUser.ts` for an example of using `getUsersBatcher`.

## Priming Data

You can manually add or update data in the cache without a full query:

If you already have the data (e.g., from a different API response or after a mutation), you can directly insert it into the cache. This is useful for normalization and optimistic updates.

```typescript
import { queryClient } from 'services/query-client'
// OR
const queryClient = useQueryClient()

queryClient.setQueryData(getMyDataQueryKey(123), myNewData123)
```

We have helpers for common entities `User`, `Track`, and `Collection`.

`primeUserData`, `primeTrackData`, and `primeCollectionData` are utils that call `setQueryData` for you with the entity and each of its sub-entities. (e.g. primeTrackData will add the `Track` and the `track.user` `User` to their respective cache keys.)

> 

Reviewer: I think this should go first since this is the main way people will be priming cache.

## Default Cache Behavior

> - **`staleTime: 5 * 60 * 1000` (Default):** Data is considered "stale" 5 minutes after being fetched. This means the _next_ time the component mounts or the query key changes, TanStack Query _can_ refetch in the background if needed. It doesn't necessarily mean a loading state will show; the cached data is still returned instantly.

Reviewer: we also have refocus refresh turned on right? Probably worth calling out
